We're talking to Father William Monaghan, M-O-N-A-H-A-N, and we're at the Gleason Library.
M-O-N-I-H-A-N.
M-O-N-I-H-A-N, I'm sorry.
William.
William, and we're at the Gleason Library at the University of San Francisco.
Father, why don't you just watch your little tour?
Now, we have one of the major collections, these are major collections along here, and Norman Strauss, whom I'm sorry you'll not be able to interview him,
He's well up in years.
He just is not able to do so, but he's one of the great collectors in America, and the first one we received was the Thomas More Award.
Well, he gave us this collection of the Richard Ledalien.
Richard Ledalien was born in England and was the carnivore of the English 1890s.
So we have formed, with his encouragement, an English 1890s collection, and so we have not only
the outstanding books of his, but manuscripts.
Those are manuscripts and autographs.
The Oscar Wilde was the center to that group.
We were too late to get an Oscar Wilde.
We at least got in the man who told the story, Boswell of Oscar Wilde.
That's Legallien.
Legallien.
And the daughter is Eva Legallien.
Eva?
Eva.
And she's on theater in America, stage
And she came here one time, and she was so pleased, and she said, well, I'm going to be sure that some of my things will come here, too.
That's great.
So this is a, you do what you can do, and we had the opportunity to get the man who told the story of England's 189s, even though we didn't get the Oscar Wilde as the center of the whole thing.
That's the essence of your collecting that, meaning to interrupt, you do what you can do.
That could almost be a credo for you, isn't it?
It is, it is.
What's available?
Then the Haussmanns, A. Haussmann, the Shropshire-led, and Lawrence Haussmanns,
are also a major work collection, and we obtained the Lawrence Haussmann work collection from a local collector here in the area.
And the A. Haussmann we've added to, but not substantially, simply because we're late.
We're too late in doing it.
We have some substantial things.
One of the major collections— Pardon me.
Manuscripts or mainly printed books on the house base?
Also, some manuscripts.
They're not—some autographs—letters.
But those are so pricey now, $4,000 and $5,000.
Now, Eric Gill is one of the major collections in America, maybe four or five major collections of Eric Gill in America.
Texas, UCLA are two other major ones, and probably the Boston Museum, the Boston Museum Y. So this is a major collection here, and now you're only seeing sort of a showcase of it, because underneath the exhibit case over there,
actual prints, proofs, drawings, and so on.
So it's not exhaustive, but we're one component part in America of the Eric Gill collection.
If you study Eric Gill, you have to come here.
Sure, that's right.
And then here are some cuts that he made and filled with gesso to make them an ornamental thing.
This is quite a beautiful room, by the way.
Is this something that you designed?
Well, the former librarian, one of the former librarians that are designing it,
But a lady friend and volunteer got the money from Dan Murphy Foundation in Los Angeles.
So that was a very, that's a major step ahead to get it through.
Because I wanted to show to our friends, we know how to take care of things.
That's the most important thing we can do.
To get their confidence.
We exhibit, we keep them, we keep up the maintenance of it and so on.
Now, anyhow, this is a representative.
Now, then, Robert Graves.
Early in the 1960s, a collector, local wool collector, put in our hands, and I call it in trust, because whatever we receive is for the public or benefit.
But in trust is Robert Graves' collection.
Well, it was basically a first edition collection.
We have added on the early wool variants.
We have both autograph letters and manuscripts, so it's a major watcher of Robert Graves' collection.
How many volumes would you guess?
Well, I would say several hundred.
But the guts, the real sources are the autographed letters and manuscripts.
So this is both Robert Bates.
HRC of Texas has a pretty good Graves collection, too.
I'm sure.
Well, they've done very well in so many others.
Now, here is the sort of showcase for the Thomas More collection.
The rest of it's on the other side there.
These are gorgeous.
My God.
It was a primary collection formed by a collector in San Francisco, who was a lawyer and a dean of the Hastings Law School.
And his name?
Morris Harrison.
Maurice Harrison.
Correct.
And so we were able to buy this in 1951, before we had any price, any money.
I went to my folks who said I wanted to borrow.
8,000 bucks, and they said, we'll give you 8,000 bucks.
So anyhow, this is how this is.
You get this for 8,000 dollars?
Yeah, 8,000.
Oh my God, there are single items here worth more than 8,000.
That's why I'm smiling.
I'm looking at some, I don't know if there are any incunables here.
These are the represent people of the 17th century, Western and the English Catholics from the Northern continent.
But down here is the real sources.
These are the first editions of Moores' Utopia.
It belonged to the family of Thomas More, the grandson.
That was his copy, William Roper's copy.
Which one is the utopia?
William Roper's copy of the English Works, 1557.
I saw a utopia go at the Bradley, was at the Bradley Martin sale for about a half a million dollars.
Now, we are specializing, not specializing, but we are getting opportunities to collect fine printing.
Now, this is the Book Hub of California.
The Book Hub of California has used
has used very fine printers in San Francisco over 60 years, and so we have a near-complete collection of the Book of California.
The Graveline Press, another San Francisco press, although it was in the Midwest and then in Seattle, in the front here, well-known, this is not a complete but near-complete collection of Graveline.
And then we have a friend, a library associate,
who makes cases for us.
So those lovely cases here.
But all the way throughout here, they suggest exquisite cases.
Now, one of the things I was interested in is, well, I'm interested in people, and people are my specialty.
And so I was able to get— People are your specialty?
Yes, my specialty, yeah.
And I knew a lady who was a collector at Robinson and Jefferies, who was a friend of Robinson and Jefferies,
And so she's deceased now, and the daughter was the one who gave us this great collection of Robertson Jeffers.
Now, this is a California poet, I think of considerable standing.
I saw his house next to Sandy Berger's place.
You were.
You certainly covered the ground.
Anyhow, we have about 150 autographed letters of the wife, Mrs. Jeffers.
That's a very important collection.
I think so.
Now, certainly, we had a good base, but we didn't have this quality.
In many areas, we have a good base to start with.
Now, over here is another printer from about 1900 to 1945, John Henry Nash.
And in our area, this is a well-known name, so that the people of
the Stanford people in the 1920s and 30s and 40s, and people here at USF, when they have a special occasion, we'd have it done by John Henry Nash.
Well, we have near complete recollection.
Now, his patrons were Charles and William Andrews Clark.
William Andrews Clark gave his library to UCLA.
So the major library of Folk and Dryden and other people like that at UCLA.
This is the William Andrews Clark Library.
We'll have the patrons of John Henry Nash, William Andrews Clark.
Interesting, you're picking around the corners in the periphery of the La Gallienne collection from the Clark.
Yeah, yeah.
It's very important because you're filling in the gaps, too.
Yeah.
Now, here is, I'm giving one picture here of an artist
Well, that's Dean.
D-E-A-N.
M-A-L-L-E-T-E.
Now, that's Dean.
Okay.
He's a local artist who died about ten years ago and did some marvelous work.
This is a double image, by the way.
I don't know how to describe it artistically, but it gives the depth, like the rain is on it.
It's beautiful.
So, it's a glowing gate, but he is a
We have a master of a collection of his work, so one of the families were allowed us to acquire a major collection.
What is the motif?
Well, the motif is a Japanese style of print.
I see.
But the subject is .
I'm just curious how he did it.
Well, that takes more knowledge of art in a practical sense than I have.
But it's a double image.
It's a double image.
That's how he signed it, H.M.D., right?
H.M.D., yeah.
So here's what the Harold Malet-Deema has.
He was known to us as the Malet-Dean.
Okay.
Now, that we don't, I mean, if Steve Poirier were here, he could show you that.
But I wanted to move into this artist, Victor Hammer.
Victor Hammer was from Europe, from Austria.
Wow.
worked with Rudolf Koch, K-O-C-H, or maybe his son did.
But Victor Hammer, this is his part, a self-portrait, a man in York City, when he heard that we got this collection of Victor Hammer from Norma Strauss.
I'm speaking about... Oh, again, this is Rich Strauss again.
Yeah, Norma Strauss, yeah.
So this Mr. Kaufman, Kaufman in York City, was very generous and honest to take over
at the Public Trust is the self-portrait of Richard Hammond, which I think is very funny.
This is of the nine newses, the nine newses which I just wrote it down.
I really don't, I'm not too warm towards that, but I'm still coming in.
You don't like that?
I'm not wowed about it.
Content or execution?
Well, the handling of the subject matter, all the faces are the same.
And I should not say I don't like it because don't put that in print.
As far as taste goes, I like the idea of music.
I like the idea of being here in the library because we should have the nine music.
But I just would say as far as artistic accomplishment, I don't think it is as great as this.
This, I think, is a very fine self-portrait.
That's very important because even though you personally may not like something, that doesn't mean you don't think it belongs in the collection.
You're not imposing your artistic...
catechism, so to speak, on the collection.
But the Hammer, the eight design typefaces, and the Unsell, Hammer Unsell is famous for it.
Oh, that's very famous.
Sure it is.
I didn't realize that we were talking about it.
So this is the source here, and his second wife is still alive in Kentucky, and I still haven't gotten to see her in Lexington.
So now, then I'll show you, this is a
painting by a Jesuit.
Beautiful.
Went to China in the 17th century, and then the emperor, like the Jesuits, who came from Europe.
That's gorgeous.
So he gave him a full-time job to paint for him.
Now, this is the confine of the emperor.
The concubine.
This is a concubine, a Pakistani woman.
And you see these three faces, all the same person.
because they participated with the vice, yes, I don't know if that's true.
But the artist is Giuseppe Castiglione, C-A-S-T-I-G-L-I-O-N-E, G-I-U-S-E-P-P-E, the years of 1688 to 1766, Jesuit artist at the Chinese Imperial Court from 1715, known as Lang Chi Ning, that's L-A-N-G-C-H-I-H-N-I-N-G, and this is a picture I've
painting of Princess, H-S-I-N-G-F-E-I, with S words, Serga, 1750, watercolor on silk.
This is my type.
Well, this has not been proven to be a genuine Castagnoni.
There's a book of the known masterworks, but a Chinese Jesuit kind of mind says,
I think it's very genuine.
It's beautiful.
Somebody did it, that's for sure, and it's quite— And it's a European—a European will matter, but still, it's a size of name in Chinese, yeah?
Okay.
This is a gift of Arthur—Mr.
and Mrs. Arthur Gambarassi.
Yes.
Okay.
This is the place.
And these are the folio, folio books.
And again, it's collecting as we could collect.
Norman Strauss gave us this wonderful collection of Habler, which are the single leaves of Inconabula books.
Oh, right.
H-A-E-B-L-E-R.
Yeah.
The Italian Inconabula.
See, it's German, German, Italian, Italian, West European.
One, two, three, it's six long, flat, folio-sized cases, I would say.
Yeah.
1927.
And Hebler is who?
That was the— Hebler was the scholar, the German scholar who put it out.
So it was 19— Oh, it's 27, yeah.
27 to 30, I guess it is.
27, 28 in three years.
But this is just—
Leaves.
Leaves, but studies on them, so by a scholar.
This is the Plantin Bible here.
This is the Plantin Bible, and another set of this established Leiden University.
Leiden University, a page of William of Orange, established the, what is today, the Leiden University of Leiden with this set.
Really?
We got this as a gift after the earthquake and fire in 1906.
They were destroyed completely.
at Hayes in Venice, the center of the city, near the civic center.
And so, but... This Bible is four volumes or eight?
Well, it's four volumes.
Two, four, six, eight.
Eight volumes.
But it's a parallel line, so there are three or four languages.
So it's a... And these are giant folios.
Are these original leather bindings?
Yes, yes.
And about how old are these Bibles, would you say?
The binding...
I would say would be 18th century.
The book itself, 16th century, through the 1500s.
And printed where?
Printed in Antwerp.
In Antwerp?
You know, Phil II was the patron, so he paid for it for the printing.
But for us to have this is one of the cornerstones of fine printing in Europe.
Okay, what do we call it?
The Biblia Regia.
Biblia, B-I-B-L-I-A, R-E-G-I-A.
And Platin, P-L-A-N-T-I-N, is a printer in Antwerp.
And Philip II, the King of Spain, was a patron.
He paid for it.
Okay, so you say this is one of the cornerstones?
The cornerstone of Bible production, Bible printing.
The polygraph before this was in Spain, and I just can't remember the name of it.
But this came to you as a gift?
As a gift?
After the earthquake and from home again?
We don't know.
It was here after 1906, so I would say in the 1910s.
But was it local?
Was it in the city someplace?
I think it probably came as a European gift.
I can only guess.
Well, that's some kind benefactor.
That's right, right.
Yeah, we don't know.
We don't know.
We tried to determine.
We couldn't find out.
What is this gorgeous?
These are the Biblia Sacra, S-A-C-R-A.
This is famous not for the printing or binding, but the Dali, Salvador Dali illustration.
Oh, their Dali illustration.
And it's very exciting.
I can show you later on another going outside there of the same set.
They're very exciting.
What do you call this room?
This is the treasure room?
Well, the stack room for the Red Book.
The what?
The which room?
The stack room.
Stack.
Oh, stack.
Okay.
Stack room for the Red Book.
So a lot of things which we have here are misled.
This is an Egyptian of Coptic things.
Oh, you have some Coptic stuff?
Life and miracles of...
T-A-K-L-A-T-A-K-L-A-T-A-K-L-A-T-A-K-L-A-T-A-K-L-A-T-A-K-L-A-T-A-K-L-A-T-A-K-L-A-T-A-K-L-A-T-A-K-L-A-T-A-K-L-A-T-A-K-L-A-T-A-K-L-A-T-A-K-L-A-T-A-K-L-A-T-A-K-L-A-T-A-K-L-A-T-A-K-L-A-T-A-K-L-A-T-A-K-L-A-T-A-K-L-A-T-A-K-L-A-T-A-
English 1890s, the Spanish magazine, for doing them.
These are English literary people.
Now, I want to show you, here's a part of a set, a set of On Columbus, which represents one of the big documentary sets of a collection we bought in 1954.
It's called On Columbus and the Navigation of the Voyages of Columbus.
There's George Nunn, annual double-end, taught in the public schools, high schools in San Francisco.
He's a first-rate scholar and historian.
And so that came to us.
But this is just one of the very large questions.
So he gave this to you?
It was not only this, but a whole large collection.
But he was a teacher?
A teacher in high school.
How did he manage to put together such wonderful things?
Precisely on a teacher's salary.
That's a marvelous thing.
Do you know something about this?
Are you going to tell me a little bit about it later?
I will.
I'll try.
At some point after we get through the tour, I've got to tell you what I'm doing, too, so you can appreciate what I'm doing, and then you'll see why you fit in so beautifully.
Well, now, these things here, we are not in a position to have extraordinary collections of our manuscripts.
We have the facsimiles, wonderful facsimiles, a look of kilns.
I know that facsimile.
Isn't it nice?
Yeah.
I know Boston College has it, and they're exceedingly proud of it.
And here's another one.
Thanks to a book collector that wouldn't exist, Robert Cotton.
Ah, yes.
He'll be in my book.
All right.
Also, Beowulf wouldn't exist if it weren't for cotton.
You've covered a lot of ground.
The Vespasian Psalters wouldn't exist if it weren't for cotton.
Yeah.
These are people that are nuts.
They're enthusiasts.
That's what I'm writing about.
But there's a purpose.
It's the collector not only accumulating, but preserving and saving.
And making it available to the public.
And passing on the product of humans.
Passing on and our institution may go out of existence in a couple of centuries.
Someone else would take it over.
This is what we're supposed to do as human beings.
That's wonderful.
This is largely what you've built, isn't it?
I know you're a modest man, but... Well, I would say I have had a lot to do with it, but the main thing is that I started with an enthusiastic start, and other people carried on.
And so the other thing is fun.
Early on, I knew...
So I could never have a strong library by depending upon university funds, because they would say, we would love to help you.
Sorry, we just can't do it.
But I really went outside, so I became head of the library in 1947.
I went out to meet people.
I've been doing it ever since.
But to me, the thing is, I create enthusiasm among friends to support us.
Now, we have an endowment fund of some size.
But I'm always getting gifts.
So what you're seeing is largely not university funds at all.
This is outside money that's doing this.
And that's your genius, isn't it?
Well, as I say, I know people, I love people, and they love me, and that's how it happens.
That's great.
And we haven't left, for the sake of my transcript, we haven't left row one yet of the spectrum.
Go ahead, sir.
You can see the boxes around here, just loads and loads of things, and it just shows that we need expansion work.
And the head librarian is thinking very seriously about finding more stacking space.
We don't want to change the beautiful room there.
We want more stacking space for the library.
So they're seeing high points, and we're acquiring them all the time.
Benvenuto Cellini, Volume 1 and Volume 2.
These are really wonderful.
I mean, you have many centuries represented here, too, I can see.
Look at that unusual binding.
That looks like this.
That is a copy made of a Latin text under the Mussolini.
No kidding.
The Virgil, the Virgil.
So it's a facsimile of the master.
It's in Greek.
Is that Greek?
No, it's Latin.
Oh, it's Latin.
Capitals.
Latin, Capitals.
No, it's not Greek.
That's not, okay.
But, um, I'm sorry to tell you more specifically, but these are individual books that are important by himself because of Pine.
His edition of this is a direct former owner's.
Mm-hmm.
It's very nice.
That's a gorgeous book.
Do you have any favorites?
Any personal favorites that particularly give you a glow when you... Well, you will hear me as I talk.
I will probably, because I have so many favorites, I can't... But here's a nice thing.
It was done by the Clubbinders.
This is the Gloria Club.
Gloria Club.
And the club wore binders around the beginning of the century.
The wealthy men of the border club hired some binders in New York City, and they're known as the club binders in the 1920s.
And to me, the important thing of this is that the lovely thing has maintained itself throughout the years.
This has been a trade.
What's the title of the book?
Well, it's the life of a coin collector.
I have this book.
You do?
Yeah.
I just got it.
Well, good for you.
I'm a collector.
You'll find out soon.
That's why I recognize it instantly.
That's why you're an ideal person to do what you're doing, because you have a feeling for what we're doing.
Okay.
But this is endless number of things which we have.
This is the first
American Catholic Bible, published in Philadelphia.
It's a very important book.
For the University of San Francisco.
It was restored, you see, in the style.
Steve Corey, the curator of this, found out how the other copies were bound in America.
Oh, wonderful.
And so he used the same thing in rebinding, so it looks like it was first in Philadelphia.
What was the year?
It was 1790-something, before the 18th century.
It really was post-revolution before you got a Catholic Bible in the United States.
That's right.
It was Matthew Cary, C-A-R-V-Y, is a major printer in Philadelphia at that time, and a man who knew society.
He was not only living in his shop, but he knew people, and they knew him.
So he's quite a force, and he's not at all a Roman Catholic who was living in a sort of small area, but he tried to sell
the bibles so when god is concerned for the partisans he made lots of money because the fathers were buying bibles so uh anyhow i'm let's continue on because i okay i could get lost with it and there's still and there's still a lot of things we have to talk about too so what do you say we interrupt now okay i'd like that i think that's a good idea and then our conversation may may develop with
I think so.
I think what I've got now is the introduction to the collection, and this would be a good time to chat.
The Sir Thomas Moore Medal, which you conceived a number of years ago and have given, it recognizes the efforts and the achievements of the private book collector, the individual private book collector, and how these collectors have contributed to the preservation
achievement, I guess.
Maybe we'll start with that.
Can I tell you the origin of it?
I wish you would.
I was with the DeGuardia Club in 1967 on one of their European trips.
Not the first, but the third or fourth European trip.
And I had just become a member, T. Waller Barrett, former president of the public, introduced me to the club.
I don't remember in 1966.
But in 1966, that was my first trip with the Gloria Club in Europe, in a stomp home.
We were all assembled in the Royal Library, and the director of the library chose to make an obvious occasion of awarding a medal for book collecting, a major person in Sweden, major collector in Sweden.
got the information there, and the phrase that I captured from them was, private book collecting a public business benefit, a public business benefit.
Now, to me, the collector, I don't want to use hard, I don't want to give any bad connotation to those who don't make it public, but we gain so much from a collector who makes it available, like Huntington, or a...
Morgan.
Morgan, thank you.
I was looking for that name.
Or Morgan.
Folger.
People who enjoy collecting, but often being available for those dollars.
That's the theme in my idea, the myth behind the book that we liked so much recently, the name of the rose.
Now, the name of the rose, to me, is a myth of a collector.
who wanted all for himself is destroyed within himself.
But if it's for others, it flourishes.
And cotton, any of these names you mentioned, are people who are interested in the public benefit.
So with that mentor, that model, the Royal Library of Sweden, we followed in their footsteps.
They came back and talked to our library associates, said, why can't we do it?
So Charles Frappier, F-R-A-C-C-H-I-A,
was then the president of our library show.
She said, well, let's do it.
So, in 1968, I met Norman Stumps.
He was still the chairman of the board of J. Walter Thompson in New York City.
So, we had lunch together, and he said, well, I'd like to get there.
And we gave him the offer to receive the first medal.
And he received it, and he said,
When I allowed to California, I'm going to help to make your library great."
He was still living in New York, you see.
He was still living in New York at a time, and in a lovely two-floor penthouse in New York.
But he was a collector who was on the board of the New York Public Library.
He was a donor to the Free Library of Philadelphia.
He was a contributor to many, many institutions.
I will help make your library great.
That's wonderful.
Anyhow, and I can name at least seven or eight collections immediately, and many more, that I can identify with his name.
How about giving me a few, just to ... All right.
I think you already showed me one.
This is from John Henry Nash, Book Club of California, Richard McGonaghan, Victor Hammer.
Okay, that's good.
These were his collections?
These were the collections he formed, and he would say to me, you know, I wonder, would you like to have this collection archive?
So when I was screening, it was passionately.
Of course, I would love to have it.
And in accepting any collection, I feel we have a public responsibility to keep that alive, to add to it.
And that's where the funds, which I have collected over the years, come in handy.
So when I see something on the market, I can do quickly and add that to it.
But the Robinson-Jefferson collection, you know, there,
Steve Corey, the curator, was at a book fair in San Francisco, was able to purchase the collection of a bibliographies, a collection of objectives, at a price of $10,000.
But we were able to move in that quickly.
The lady who gave the lecture said, I'm amazed and thrilled.
I just can't speak enough of your institution, because we moved quickly to add some substance to it.
So we don't put it up and lock it up and say, thanks very much, goodbye.
You are kind of, well, let's talk a little bit more about Strauss, because I really think I have to know.
I heard a story from Sandy Berger yesterday, and he told me to check it out through you.
But I heard that he and another fellow, one was collecting Doves Press, and the other was collecting Kelmscott Press.
And so they decided, listen, why should we compete?
Let's trade.
Is that a true story?
Yes, it is.
It is.
I don't know particularly.
That's a very familiar story to me.
and Sandy would be able to give you more.
Yeah, Sandy did, but he just said to run it by you just to see if you recall anything.
Well, I'll recall it, but I don't recall it specifically.
That's fine.
Well, Norman Strong has many collections.
He still has many collections?
Well, no, not many now.
The man in Maine, who was a pirate, a pirate,
A pirate?
I'm reaching for it, because he would reprint books without any authority.
That's a pirate.
And so, there are many pirate editions, which he's got.
I'm reaching for the name.
I'm sorry, you can't pull out my memory.
But Norman still keeps that.
He's given talks, Norman has given many talks on his very collection.
One of the major things which Norman Stiles did, he met in New York,
the first chancellor of UC Santa Cruz, California Santa Cruz, starting a new campus.
They liked the man very much.
He said, I'm going to give you a collection to be your cornerstone library.
They promised Carlisle, Carlisle collection.
And this is a collection of importance in the beginning, but also he says, I'm going to promise you, I'm going to add to it.
So autograph letters, manuscripts,
It's a major collection at UC.
What, major collection anywhere?
Who can ask that?
What amazes me about this man is that, from what you've told me, it would be very easy for him to give a collection to Harvard or to the Beinecke or to the Firestone of Princeton or Stanford.
But it seems to me he's really trying to help
the emerging collection, that he wants to spread it around a little bit.
Yes, he does.
Is this a fair reading on that?
It's a fair reading, but again, he's a people man, too.
I got to know him, and we had many visits.
I was a house guest in St.
Helena.
Now, let me give you sort of a sidelight on this.
Ellen Schaefer, S-H-A-F-F-E-R.
He's the curator of his museum, the Silverado Museum in St.
Leon.
Oh, he's the Silverado man.
Oh, I'm perfect.
He's the founder of that whole museum.
Now, um, uh, okay.
Now, Ellen Schaefer is the same age as Norman Charles.
The difference is that Ellen Schaefer is alive and running right now.
You know, she's 88, 89, but she's, now, there's been an oral history program
at UC California, and I have recommended, just a matter of a few weeks ago, that Ellen Shearer be interviewed for The Old History, because this will be a source for Hilma Schultz.
She will tell her a lot about Hilma Schultz.
In fact, if you had the time in view of your book and your own time schedule, it would be worth making a point with her to see the Hurricane Lena.
And how far is that?
Well, it's the driving time about an hour and a half maximum.
Okay.
I'm leaving Sunday.
Do you think I could talk to her tomorrow?
Well, it's possible.
You can telephone.
But it's more important that you know of her.
Okay.
Well, I'd like to talk to her, too, but I could probably talk to you.
I'm going to call her today.
Okay.
Ruth will get you the telephone number.
When I say Dr. Milner-Strauss,
Um, uh, the, um, the Scottish BBC for Broadcasting Company came out to Silver Art Museum and did a story, a film story, a cassette, a video cassette on his, his museum.
Is that available?
Sure it is, but it's available from, from, from, uh, from, uh, from Alan Shaker.
See, if you really contact her, in the sense of person to person,
then you can ask her questions by telephone from time to time.
Oh, no question, but I'd like to see it, too.
Yes, you should see it.
But anyhow, that would be a good visual to see.
So I would say that the Beinecke had a Stevenson election, and I think today there's nothing to match the Stevenson election that Norma Strauss had won.
This is a man who is an exemplar of the
public trust of collectors, meaning that they think they owe something to the community, the learning community.
To me, you can share this with me, that you and I, citizens of any country, can go anywhere in the world and use these items with no cost, although very low cost.
So, the riches of humanity are available for us to study.
Isn't that marvelous?
And museums, too.
I mean, no part of the museum.
I did symposium on Egypt, and I would never have gotten my feeling and my passion without seeing the Metropolitan Museum after they had doubled the galleries at the Metropolitan Museum.
Anyway, I'm talking in your terms, my terms.
The collectors whom I've known have this passion for the future of the population.
Let's talk a little bit about your passion.
It is kind of contradictory, paradoxical, not contradictory, it's almost paradoxical that a man who's been a Jesuit all his life, taken sworn vows of poverty, should have the spark to acquire great and exquisite greatness.
Tell me a little bit about this and how you knew, I've read someplace that you knew from the very beginning,
that your mission in life is to build a library.
Well, that's what Kevin Starr said.
Was that a fair quote?
A quote of Kevin Starr about me.
I would say that my emergence or my passion for books, I would say emergence to my own consciousness, because it was there without me being aware of it, was looking at the Thomas More Library,
in 1951 at the booksellers' shop.
And he said, Bill, I think you should see this and take a look at it.
And I said, I began to look through things, and I went on fire.
The quality of books I saw there by John Dunn's annotated copy of Utopia.
Isn't that fantastic?
with both pencil and ink.
Now, again, because I know collectors... You have that out here?
Yes.
Want to see it?
Yeah, I'd love to.
I bet I would love this one.
So you just said, because you were... Because I was acquainted with a man whom you probably know of the British Library.
He's one of the spokesmen for... He's the editor of... Nicholas Barker.
Nicholas Barker, thank you.
I interviewed him twice already.
You did?
Well, he looked at this book as... He's a kind of a fellow...
charming fellow who, a lot of people were sitting around here, who had to sit by himself and examine this, and he had a great concentration, and people would be talking with him, and he paid no attention to this.
But he said to me, now, he said, I want you to notice that these pencil marks are also John Donne's, but there's martial annotations here.
Look at the condition of this.
Beautiful.
Is that the original binding, do you think, or it must have been rebounded some point?
Rebounded, it was rebounded some point.
It's a nice old binding.
One of our faculty wrote an article on the annotations in the margin of John Donne.
We're looking for some ink annotations by John Donne.
But they add substantially to the knowledge of John Donne's mind.
See, he's on the feminine side of Moore Lyon, so he's a descendant of Thomas More.
Is this a first edition, by the way?
No, it's not any important.
Well, it's an early edition, certainly.
It's 1560.
Yeah, it's an early edition, but by no means is it the first edition.
But it's the association of it.
Now, here, these are marginal allocations.
Marginal allocations of John Donne.
These are in 10.
Oh, yeah.
Crisis of the King's Prerogatives.
And Nicholas was going through this.
Oh, yeah.
1563 is the date on it.
I'm going to place this back in your hands, Father.
The article by one of our friends, John Gleason, A Glimpse from Marginalia.
Dr. Dunn and the Ports of Kings, colon, A Glimpse from Marginalia by John B. Gleason, published by the Journal of English and Germanic.
Philology at the University of Illinois Press, October 1970, number four.
But, okay, I'll check it out.
Well, anyhow, these are examples of things that I saw in booksellers' shop.
And then I saw a manuscript, an early 17th century manuscript of the life of Thomas More, which I could show you as well.
Then also,
There's so many things exciting me about it.
And I said to Dave McGee, that's M-A-G-E-E, M-A-G-E-E.
I said, Dave, how much time do I have?
He said, how much do you want?
I said, a week.
Oh, you have a week.
So as I was already told, he went to my mother and father.
He said, I want to borrow $8,000.
To your mother and father?
Mother and father.
They died in the 1950s, in 1951.
So I said to him,
I'd like to borrow $8,000.
I'd pay you back $1,000 a year.
And they went in the huddle and talked to my brother and sister, and said, we won't lend it to you.
We'll get it to you.
That's a nice story.
This became a cornerstone of our collection.
So the Thomas More Library, the Thomas More Collection, they took a medal.
That's a wonderful story.
Warren Howell.
You know that name, Warren Howell?
Oh, indeed.
So when I used the word Saint Thomas More, he said, what are you talking about?
So anyhow, I said, okay, Sir Thomas More.
That's more universal.
But Warren and I became very close friends.
That's how it surfaced.
I knew I had it inside of me because I was never a collector in my earlier years.
But I responded to quality of ancient books and a condition
Dave William McGee would tell our students, our Bing Maher students, to see them, they would say, condition is everything.
You can have a magnificent book and lousy condition.
What is it?
But look at this, something you would enjoy holding.
This is a 16th century book.
It's a delight to hold it and look at it and study it.
Now, again, that's a book you'd take in any condition, though.
But you would restore it.
This is the obligation we all have in your own household or in your library to keep it up, keep it in good condition.
So to continue on with the passion that I have, I wanted library equality.
I was at the Honnold Library in Cromont, H-O-N-N-O-L-D, Honnold Library in Cromont, which is the central library for the Cromont Colleges.
And Dave Davies, D-A-V-I-E-S, was then the director of the Hall of Library, and a very close friend of mine.
When I saw the quality of his collection on the stack, open stacks, I said, that's what I want to do.
So I would say, as far as I'm responding to exemplars for myself and for models, so I want to have quality.
So when I look at our stacks,
I want people to see substantial stuff to work on right now.
So, granted, you take a chance to lose some things, you have lost things, but the purpose is it's open to the public.
And if you're open to the public, you take chances.
But anyhow, that's my passion to make available.
And the other thing was, another passion was,
knowledge.
You have to know.
What good does it go to a bookstore and say, I'm going to buy this book?
As you know and I know, you have to be aware of the importance of the book, and at least have the nose for it.
This may be an important book.
Then go back and check it for your book to read the article.
I was at Oberlin College in 1960, and the retired librarian, I wrote in Kessner, Cleveland,
I said to him, what advice do you have for a younger man than a librarian?
He said, my advice is bibliography, bibliography, bibliography.
And that is so basic.
So you're spending life in the study of sources.
Because you and I know I cannot order in technology by the way to check it out.
I can order in apps by way to check it out.
So I have purchased books in every field.
In fact, they say, well, a Catholic case with lowercase c. So I would say I'm a passionate man, I would say that.
And booksellers I've known and people that I've been inspired by are passionate people, too, meaning they just love it, love what they're doing.
So hopefully that will give you some effort of answering your question.
So tell me, but still, this is a Jesuit school, I gather, and your means, as you pointed out, are not as great as, say, the Beinecke's or the HRC of Texas.
You've had to learn the craft of friendly persuasion, didn't you?
Yes, yes.
And, I mean, this story that you mentioned, the Kevin Starr story, they called you the penniless Medici of San Francisco.
Yeah, yeah.
kind of a newsy headline, I guess, but how do you respond to being so described?
Well, I felt I needed to get out to people who had resources to help us, and when I was taken out of head librarian's job in 1964, I was in 17 years.
I knew I had to have the support of the community, so I began the symposia.
In 1965, that was the year after I began into public relations, formerly.
I've always been doing public relations, but I had a different hat as a librarian.
Now I was a PR man called Director of Library Relations.
I formed a symposium, which would be a literary artistic symposium, which would attract, my purpose was,
people in the community who support the ballet, the symphony, the opera, and the museum, who support the arts.
And with the help of prominent ladies here, I reached them.
Now, this is not a Roman Catholic thing, not a religious thing.
It's a humanistic program.
I just finished the program on Shakespeare, and I think one of the strongest staffs I've ever had, both lectures and discussions,
individuals ready to get into the battle about Shakespeare on comedy, Shakespeare comedy.
So this is my mark, my identification.
And Ruth is showing you, like, the folders of photographs and so on, which we're doing with that too.
But I did go out after not to try to advertise nationally.
I did, in the Saturday, a review.
And it did me some good, but I'm still struggling with advertising, because I charge a lot of money.
You actually take out advertising?
Yeah, advertising.
And what do you say in these ads?
Well, it would be Freedom of Authority was my first program.
The University of California had the first riots on campus as a student revolt.
And so, I took Freedom of Authority in the 16th century, more than that.
And I had a former director of libraries at MIT as my chairman.
a man from Yale, that's my lecture on it more, a man from France, a lecture on Rasmus, a man from Stanford on Luther.
I went down to Stanford with my announcement.
I said to George Houle, H-O-U-L-E, who was then director of the music department, I said, I want you to do the music for me in this symposium.
I want a total experience.
He said, I want lectures.
I want a total experience for people to have.
So he said,
All right.
I'm looking at your program.
I don't have the time, but it's so good I can't turn it down.
So he joined me, and so we had three dinners for three evenings.
We had the lectures discussed in the day, ending at 2 o'clock, but evening we had Trader Vic's, went down to Sanctuary to the Paul Besson Vineyards, and each time we had music appropriate for that time, with instruments, in fact, some of the instruments of that time.
And then the final one is that the Legion of Honor, one of the major museums in San Francisco, out near the Golden Gate, we had, in the Crystal Room, we had a banquet, the Wild Boar, a formal banquet.
And we had drinks in an adjoining area, a gallery, and had the music appropriate to bring the people in following the Wild Boar into the dining room, and we had a dance
and then finally I got up, and we had a lovely dinner.
So I worked hard, but the program just left my hands straight up.
So I said at the end, ladies and gentlemen, this concludes the symposium in the authority, good evening.
And a doctor, MD, got up and said, oh my, I beg to differ with you.
This is not the end, there's the beginning.
So I've been doing it every year since 1965.
Not every year, but most years since 1965, so 25 years ago.
So I've done 23 of them, so next will be 24, and so on.
Do you believe that, I mean, prior to your active interest, there was nothing here, right?
Most of my predecessors in the library management were scholars, were people who were more teachers than anything else.
Then before me was a Jesuit who was a real book collector, and he built up the basic sources in our library, the pre-article runs, the reference books which we needed.
But when I came aboard in 1947, we had about 50,000 volumes, and they were not all in one place.
And so the then president of the university,
responded to my interest on planning a new structure.
So I went across the country to Washington State at Pullman.
In fact, our library is very similar to their book.
Then went to Colorado, to Iowa, all places were planning new structures.
Went to Harvard, to MIT.
MIT, I got a great deal of help at MIT.
and then Princeton.
And so the new idea was the modular library, which means that you can, without keeping the center structure around the elevated toilets, all the rest of the space is usable.
Space take walls, whatever.
So I came back, I presented to the trustees, and they said, okay, and happily, the money became immediately available.
I mean, a million and a quarter right on the barrel, no fundraising necessary.
There it was.
That's great.
So, this building now was completed and dedicated in December 1950.
That's pretty nice.
Today, we are approaching 600,000 blinds.
You started with 50,000.
You added a half a million plus 50.
It's a matter of, again,
I want to say that the library staff and family have done a lot, but I have maybe created an environment to make it move ahead.
Whenever I'm traveling in Cleveland, or in Boston, or Chicago, or New York, or wherever, I go in to see the bookstores.
And I don't depend upon them giving any quotations.
I respond to what I've seen.
And I look for the bottom shelves.
And very often they were not mocked up and said, okay, take it as it is.
Keep that same price.
So I pursued, and I went to Europe in 63, this is the end of my term as head librarian, in 1963, 54, from January to July.
And I probably acquired 10,000 books on that occasion.
Wow.
And including one major library on
foreign history, war, and foreign policy.
So that was a major coup.
And I had good force in meeting people in Belgium.
Now, the prices I paid in 1964 are amazing.
Under ten dollars a book, like five dollars a book.
Very important, ordinary good book.
We would be very happy to pay $35, $40, $50 for the same book."
I'd say, thank you very much for this price.
But they were, in England, $500 book, under one pound.
But that was hard work.
Even with my passion, it was hard work that six months, as far as I was exhausted.
I lost weight.
In six months, you acquired 10,000 books.
And you knew what you were getting.
I mean, tell me about the conviction.
What I do, whenever I—I've always done this, from the European ship on the present day, I never buy anything on the wall.
I get a quotation that was sent down to the library, to the library staff for participation in it.
So, they would say, we already have it.
or we have another edition, or we don't need it, or we don't want it.
So I'm probably a sportsman that I could buy it, and so it's a cooperative thing.
But my nose says this is an important book, and 90% of the time they order it.
So I have the funds, and they buy it.
And just maybe one statement on your conviction of why a university needs not just books, but rare books.
Well, the rare books, it's an unfortunate term, but to a lay person outside of the real world and my world, it's very misleading.
They feel it's going to be something under glass, it's going to be something like a museum thing, which is static, not active.
I consider the materials in this room and in this area are sources of study, and we have had
A number of people come here and do serious work, and they say, I have everything I need to study in this particular subject.
I'd like to quote Sosnitzel at the end of August 1914.
He portrays a woman teacher at a university.
This is in Russia.
And this woman is talking to the girls, students, sophomores.
She says, girls go to the sources.
Otherwise, one shadow box plucked into another shadow box.
Now, that is very strong to me, because we have things here which our factory are not yet connected with.
There is primary source for material here for publications.
So, it's not a museum thing.
We have a nice tsunami, granted, but it's primarily
Well, it's important to show what you have, but basically you have to have the collection.
It's the collection that makes the collection.
But the other thing, fascinating for us, that people would discover things which we didn't realize they had, because this is what an archive, particularly a rare bookman, why?
I didn't know if you had this.
Well, of course, it's our pleasure to know that they recognized certain sources, because a specialist in a special area would say, that is very important.
we know is important, but how important we didn't know.
And the strength, would you just tell me briefly what you think the strength of the collection is, in what areas?
Particularly strong?
Well, in literature, American, English, some French, in art.
The history of thought, it's pretty hard for me to say these things without coming down to specific instances.
This housing collection is not a terribly important collection for research.